/*  _______         ____    __         ___    ___
 * \    _  \       \    /  \  /       \   \  /   /     '   '  '
 *  |  | \  \       |  |    ||         |   \/   |       .      .
 *  |  |  |  |      |  |    ||         ||\  /|  |
 *  |  |  |  |      |  |    ||         || \/ |  |       '  '  '
 *  |  |  |  |      |  |    ||         ||    |  |       .      .
 *  |  |_/  /        \  \__//          ||    |  |
 * /_______/edicated  \____/niversal  /__\  /____\usic /|  .  . astardisation
 *                                                    /  \
 *                                                   / .  \
 * release.txt - Release notes for DUMB.            / / \  \
 *                                                 | <  /   \_
 *                                                 |  \/ /\   /
 *                                                  \_  /  > /
 *                                                    | \ / /
 *                                                    |  ' /
 *                                                     \__/
 */


********************************************
*** DUMB v0.8.1, released 11 August 2002 ***
********************************************

This is a minor release that fixes a few bugs. One of these bugs, however,
was pretty serious. dumb_register_dat_xm() was never coded! It was prototyped
in aldumb.h, so code would compile, but there would be an unresolved symbol
at the linking stage. This has been fixed.

Platforms other than Unix did not have a working 'make veryclean' target;
this has been fixed. In addition, the makefiles now use 'xcopy' instead of
'copy', since on some systems GNU Make seems to have trouble calling commands
built in to the shell.

Contrary to the errata that was on the DUMB website, the makeall.sh and
makecore.sh scripts actually DID install in /usr. This has now been
corrected, and regardless of whether you use these scripts or call make
directly, the files will now be installed to /usr/local by default.

The XM loader used to treat stereo samples as mono samples with the data for
the right channel positioned after the data for the left channel. This
generally resulted in an unwanted echo effect. This has been fixed.

When playing XM files, specifying an invalid instrument would cause an old
note on that channel to come back (roughly speaking). Fast Tracker 2 does not
exhibit this behaviour. This has been fixed.

The GCC makefiles used -mpentium, which is deprecated in gcc 3.x. This was
generating warnings, and has now been fixed.

In XM files, the length of a sample is stored in bytes. DUMB was assuming
that the length of a 16-bit sample would be even. I had two XM files where
this was not the case, and DUMB was unable to load them. This has been fixed.

In order to accommodate the extra part of the version number,
DUMB_REVISION_VERSION has been added. DUMB_VERSION has also been added in
order to facilitate checking if the version of DUMB installed is sufficient.
See dumb.txt for details.

As a last-minute fix, the XM "Break to row" effect is now loaded properly. It
was necessary to convert from binary-coded decimal to hexadecimal (those who
have experience with Fast Tracker 2 will know what I mean). In short, this
means the effect will now work properly when breaking to row 10 or greater.

DUMB v0.8 had faulty release date constants; DUMB_MONTH and DUMB_DAY were
swapped! for this reason, DUMB_DATE should not be compared against any date
in 2002. This note has been added to dumb.txt and also to dumb.h.

Please scroll to the end and read the release notes for the first version,
DUMB v0.7. Most of them apply equally to this release. However, the
non-portable code was rewritten for DUMB v0.8, so that point does not apply.
The point about length not being calculated also applies to XM files.

Enjoy :)


****************************************
*** DUMB v0.8, released 14 June 2002 ***
****************************************

Welcome to the second release of DUMB!

In addition to these notes, please read below the release notes for the
previous version, DUMB v0.7. Most of them apply equally to this release.
However, the non-portable code has been rewritten; DUMB should now port to
big-endian platforms.

The main improvement in this release of DUMB is the support for XM files.
Enormous thanks go to Julien Cugniere for working on this while I had to
revise for my exams!

There was a mistake in the makefiles in the last release. The debugging
Allegro interface library was mistakenly named libaldmbd.a instead of
libaldmd.a, meaning you had to compile with -laldmbd, contrary to what the
docs said. Apologies to everyone who lost sleep trying to work out what was
wrong! The reason for using libaldmd.a is to maintain compatibility with
plain DOS, where filenames are limited to eight characters (plus a three-
letter extension). The makefiles have now been changed to match the
information in the docs, so you may have to alter your project files
accordingly.

The example programs were faulty, and crashed on Windows if they were unable
to load the file. It was also difficult to work out how to exit them (you had
to click the taskbar button that didn't have a window, then press a key).
They have been improved in both these respects.

I have now added a docs/faq.txt file (Frequently Asked Questions), which is
based on problems and misconceptions people have had with the first release.
Please refer to it before contacting me with problems.

Thanks to networm for touching up the Unix makefile and writing the
instructions on using it.

Incidentally, today (Friday 14 June) is the Robinson College May Ball at
Cambridge Uni. God knows why it's called a May Ball if it's in June. I'm not
going myself (72 GBP, and I'd have to wear a suit, ugh), but with all the
noise outside I shall enjoy pumping up the speakers tonight!


****************************************
*** DUMB v0.7, released 2 March 2002 ***
****************************************

This is the first release of DUMB, and parts of the library are not
crystallised. Don't let this put you off! Provided you don't try to use any
features that aren't documented in docs/dumb.txt, the library should be rock
solid and you should be able to upgrade more or less without problems.

Here are some notes on this release:

- There is some non-portable code in this release of DUMB. It is likely that
  the library will fail to load IT files with compressed samples on
  big-endian machines such as the Apple Macintosh.

- If your program ever aborts with exit code 37 while loading an IT file,
  PLEASE LET ME KNOW! The IT file in question has a stereo compressed sample
  in it, and the format is unspecified for this case (Impulse Tracker itself
  doesn't use stereo samples at all). I will need the IT file in question,
  and any information you can give me about how the IT file was created (e.g.
  what program). (If you don't get to see an exit code, let me know anyway.)

- If your program ever outputs a line resembling "Inst 01 Env: 0,64 8,32
  15,48" to stderr while loading an IT file, PLEASE LET ME KNOW! You have an
  old IT file (saved by an Impulse Tracker version older than 2.00), and
  support for such files is untested.

- The length of IT and S3M files is not currently calculated. It is just set
  to ten minutes.
